 
 
 
 
 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a 
secure processing environment 
 
TEHDAS2 – Second Joint Action Towards the European Health 
Data Space 
 
 
27 May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-funded by 
the European Union 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   2 
   
0 Document info 
 
Disclaimer  
Funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of 
the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or HaDEA. 
Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. 
 
0.1 Authors 
 
Lead Author(s) 
Lead organisation  
Irene Schlünder 
TMF e.V., Germany 
 Antal Bodi 
National Directorate General for Hospitals, Hungary 
Victorien Hanché  
Health Data Hub, France 
Raitis Peculis 
Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, 
Latvia  
Léa Rizzuto 
Health Data Hub, France 
Vita Rovite 
Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, 
Latvia 
Inga Selecka  
The Centre of Disease Prevention and Control of 
Latvia (SPKC), Latvia 
Lise Skovgaard Svingel 
Central Denmark Region, Denmark 
Anna Szilagyi 
National Directorate General for Hospitals, Hungary 
Emmi Turunen 
HUS Group, the joint authority for Helsinki and 
Uusimaa, Finland 
Reviewers  
Lead organisation 
Marianne Benderra 
Health Data Hub, France 
Pia Brinkmann 
BfArM - Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical 
Devices, Germany 
Heikki Lehväslaiho 
CSC – IT Center for Science Ltd., Finland 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   3 
   
Lead Author(s) 
Lead organisation  
Helena Lodenius  
CSC – IT Center for Science Ltd., Finland 
Amélie Schäfer 
Health Data Hub, France 
Katharina Schneider  
BfArM - Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical 
Devices, Germany 
 
0.2 Keywords 
 
Keywords 
TEHDAS2, Joint Action, Health Data, Health Data Space  
 
0.3 Document history  
 
Date 
Version 
Editor 
Change 
Status 
01/07/2024 
0.1 
Irene Schlünder  
First draft 
Draft 
19/12/2024 
0.2 
Irene Schlünder 
Draft to be 
reviewed by the 
Consortium 
Draft 
20/01/2025 
1 
Irene Schlünder 
Document to be 
submitted for 
public 
consultation 
Final 
27/05/2025 
2 
Irene Schlünder 
Document after 
public 
consultation 
(final deliverable) 
Final 
 
Accepted in Project Steering Group by written procedure on 27 May 2025.  
 
 
 
Copyright Notice 
Copyright © 2024 TEHDAS2 Consortium Partners. All rights reserved. For more 
information on the project, please see www.tehdas.eu. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   4 
   
Contents 
1 
Abbreviations .................................................................................................................. 5 
2 
Executive summary ........................................................................................................ 5 
3 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 7 
3.1 Advancing health data use in the European Health Union ........................................... 7 
4. Introduction to the guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment .. 8 
4.2 Scope ............................................................................................................................ 9 
4.3 Legal framework ........................................................................................................... 9 
5 
What is an SPE and why and when do data users need an SPE? .............................. 10 
5.1 Excursus - What is personal data? ............................................................................. 12 
5.2 
In which format is personal data made available in an SPE? ............................... 13 
6 
How to suggest the appropriate SPE? ......................................................................... 15 
7 
What are the fees to use the SPE? .............................................................................. 16 
8 
Communication with SPE provider ............................................................................... 17 
9 
How to get access to the SPE ...................................................................................... 18 
10 How to analyse data within the SPE ............................................................................. 18 
11 Who is accountable as data controller? ....................................................................... 20 
12 What happens in case of rule violation? ....................................................................... 22 
13 What happens after finishing data analysis? ................................................................ 23 
Annex 1: EHDS user journey description ............................................................................. 24 
Annex 2: Glossary ................................................................................................................ 26 
Annex 3: How this Guideline has been developed ............................................................... 29 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   5 
   
 
1 Abbreviations 
Term  
Abbreviation  
D  
Deliverable  
Data Governance Act  
DGA  
Data Protection Officer  
DPO  
Directorate-General  
DG  
European Health Data Space  
EHDS  
European Union  
EU  
General Data Protection Regulation  
GDPR  
Health Data Access Body  
HDAB  
Joint Action  
JA  
Multifactor authentication  
MFA  
Secure Processing Environment  
SPE  
The Finnish Innovation Fund  
Sitra  
Towards the European Health Data Space  
TEHDAS  
Work Package  
WP  
 
2 Executive summary 
The aim of this guideline is to provide support to those who plan to access personal 
electronic health data for secondary use purposes through the infrastructure set up by the 
European Health Data Space (EHDS) regulation, the “HealthData@EU” infrastructure. 
The guideline is designed to support data users, specifically reflecting their activities from 
the moment they gain access to the approved datasets within a Secure Processing 
Environment (SPE) until the completion of their analysis and the export of results. An SPE 
is a secure digital workspace where authorised users can process electronic health data 
in a highly controlled manner. 
 
The guideline takes the perspective of the data user and is intended to be consulted 
already from the project planning phase, i.e., before starting the data application process, 
after the access application form has been submitted, or granted. This is advisable since 
certain fees apply already when the data user, as data applicant, submits a data access 
application to a Health Data Access Bodies (HDAB). The data applicant will benefit from 
assessing the feasibility of conducting their analyses in an SPE at an early stage. In 
addition, the data applicant may state in the data access application which SPE appears 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   6 
   
to be suitable for analysing the requested data. The proposal of a certain SPE must be 
justified in the application and will be part of the data permit. 
 
It should be noted that drawing up a definitive guideline for data users remains challenging 
at this stage, as the implementation of the EHDS regulation (Regulation (EU) 2025/327, 
in force since 26 March 2025) by the HDABs is still evolving. The HDABs will be 
responsible for interpreting and applying the regulation in practice, and key 
implementation tools—such as guidelines and technical specifications—are still being 
developed. This document will therefore need to be updated as further implementing 
guidance becomes available.  
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   7 
   
 
3 Introduction  
3.1 Advancing health data use in the European Health Union 
 
As part of the European Health Union, the European Union (EU) is advancing the use of 
health data for secondary purposes, including research, innovation and policymaking. 
Smooth and secure access to data will drive the development of new treatments and 
medicines and optimise resource utilisation—all with the overarching goal of improving 
the health of citizens across Europe. 
 
TEHDAS2, the second joint action Towards the European Health Data Space, represents 
a significant step forward in this vision. The project will develop guidelines and technical 
specifications to facilitate smooth cross-border use of health data, and support data 
holders, data users and the new health data access bodies in fulfilling their responsibilities 
and obligations outlined in the European Health Data Space (EHDS) regulation.   
  
TEHDAS2 focuses on several critical aspects of health data use:  
• 
Data discovery: Findability and availability of health data, ensuring it is accessible 
for secondary purposes; 
• 
Data access: Developing harmonised access procedures and establishing 
standardised approaches for granting data access across Member States; 
• 
Secure 
processing 
environment: 
Defining 
technical 
specifications 
for 
environments where sensitive health data can be processed safely; 
• 
Citizen-centric obligations: Providing guidance on fulfilling obligations to citizens, 
such as communicating significant research findings that impact their health, 
informing them about research outcomes and ensuring transparency in how their 
data is used; 
• 
Collaboration models: Developing guidance on collaboration and guidelines on 
fees and penalties as well as third country and international access to data. 
 
TEHDAS2 will contribute to a harmonised implementation of the EHDS regulation through 
the concrete guidelines and technical specifications. Some of these documents and 
resources will also provide input to implementing acts of the regulation. Hence, the joint 
action will increase the preparedness for the EHDS implementation and lead to better 
coordination of Member States’ joint efforts towards the secondary use of health data, 
while also reducing fragmentation in policies and practices related to secondary use. 
 
The work performed in Work package 7 (WP7) addresses “Safe and secure processing” 
of electronic health data within the EHDS infrastructure. The goal is to enable secure 
processing of EU citizen’s electronic health data while fostering a secure, interoperable, 
and efficient health data ecosystem. The output of this work package consists of 
guidelines and technical specifications that shall inform further decisions and technical 
frameworks to set up the EHDS.  
 
The results of WP7 are distributed across five tasks. Task 7.1 provides guidance to users 
about their duties and responsibilities when analysing data in a secure processing 
environment. Next, guidelines for data minimisation and de-identification give guidance 
on how to address the challenges of health data minimisation, pseudonymisation, 
anonymisation and the generation of synthetic data (task 7.2 includes sub-tasks: 7.2.1, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   8 
   
7.2.2, 7.2.3 & 7.2.4). Specifications for the implementation of a common IT infrastructure 
(task 7.3) shall help member states to connect to the EHDS ecosystem. To ensure 
interoperability, common security requirements applicable to all secure processing 
environments are defined in addition to functional and technical services that should be 
part of all secure processing environments (task 7.4). Lastly, information about data 
linkage techniques and possibilities of quality control of linked data are collected (task 
7.5). 
 
Here is an overview of the documents that are part of WP7: 
• 
Guidelines for data users on how to use data in a secure processing environment 
(task 7.1); 
• 
Guidelines 
for 
Health 
Data 
Access 
Bodies 
on 
data 
minimisation, 
pseudonymisation, anonymisation and synthetic data (task 7.2); 
• 
Technical specifications for Health Data Access Bodies on the implementation of 
the common IT infrastructure (task 7.3); 
• 
Technical specifications for Health Data Access Bodies on the implementation of 
secure processing environments (task 7.4); 
• 
Guidelines for Health Data Access Bodies on linkage of health datasets (task 7.5). 
 
 
4. Introduction to the guideline on how to use data in a secure processing 
environment 
 
This guideline belongs to a set of guidelines and technical specifications supporting the 
implementation of the European Health Data Space (EHDS) as provided in the regulation. 
 
Other TEHDAS2 guidelines and technical specifications that are relevant for data users: 
• 
Deliverable 4.1 Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on fees and penalties for 
non-compliance related to the EHDS regulation 
• 
Deliverable 4.3 Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on international and third 
country access and transfer of electronic health data  
• 
Deliverable 5.4 Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on enrichment of health 
datasets 
• 
Deliverable 6.2 Guideline for Health Data Users on good application practice for 
data access and data requests 
• 
Deliverable 7.2 Guidelines for Health Data Access Bodies on data minimisation, 
pseudonymisation, anonymisation and synthetic data 
• 
Deliverable 7.4 Technical specification for Health Data Access Bodies on the 
implementation of secure processing environments    
• 
Deliverable 8.1 Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on how to implement opt-
out from secondary use of electronic health data 
• 
Deliverable 8.2 Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on implementing the 
obligation of notifying the natural person on a significant finding from the 
secondary use of health data  
• 
Deliverable 8.4 Guideline for data users on handling research Outcomes 
 
4.1 Target audience 
 
This guideline is written for data users before they submit an application for data access 
through the EHDS infrastructure or after they have received a data access permit from a 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   9 
   
competent HDAB (For the application process see D6.2 Guideline for Health Data Users 
on good application practice for data access and data requests). 
 
4.2 Scope 
 
The aim of this guideline is to provide support to those who plan to access electronic 
health data for secondary use purposes through the infrastructure set up by the European 
Health Data Space (EHDS) regulation. It is designed to support data users engaging with 
the EHDS framework for secondary use, specifically focusing on their activities from the 
moment they gain access to the selected datasets within an SPE until the completion of 
their analysis and the export of results. Thus, the guideline covers the following steps: 
1. What to take into consideration regarding the use of an SPE when planning to access 
data through the EHDS infrastructure, even before submitting a data application, 
including: 
• 
What is an SPE? 
• 
Why and when is an SPE needed? 
• 
Can the data user choose an SPE?  
 
• 
What will be the expected cost of using an SPE? 
2.  How to access the approved data in the SPE, once the data user has received the 
data permit following their application regarding a certain set of personal data, including: 
• 
How to communicate with the SPE manager/provider? 
• 
How to get access to the data in the SPE? 
 
3. What needs to be considered when analysing data in an SPE, including: 
• 
What rules to follow? 
• 
Who is accountable as data controller?  
• 
What happens in case of rule violation? 
4. What happens after completion of the data analysis and export of results, including: 
• 
Export of authorised anonymised results in a statistical format 
• 
Cold storage options within the SPE for reproducibility purposes, during the validity 
period of the data permit 
• 
Deletion of the data in the SPE 
• 
Transparency obligations 
 
4.3 Legal framework 
The main legal act for accessing data through the EHDS infrastructure is the EHDS 
regulation (2025/327, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2025/327/oj/eng ). But processing 
personal data for secondary use under the EHDS also falls into the scope of the general 
data protection regulation (GDPR, regulation (EU) 2016/679). Its rules are applicable. 
Therefore, data users should involve their data protection officer (DPO) when processing 
personal health data even when the users are acting within an SPE. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   10 
   
The EHDS regulation, which forms the decisive legal framework for this guideline, has 
recently been adopted. It is therefore still quite open as to what different implementations 
there will be in detail. Thus, it is not yet possible to make a detailed recommendation on 
all points. Any gaps will have to be closed over time.  
This guideline is based on the English language version. In fact, however, all EU language 
versions of the regulation are equally binding. 
Data users are required to carefully review the data permit issued by the HDAB to 
understand the specific terms and conditions for using the data in an SPE. This is a 
binding administrative decision. This guideline offers a high-level overview but should 
always be read alongside the data access permit and relevant agreements to ensure 
compliance with the EHDS regulation and GDPR. 
It should be noted that the EHDS exists alongside other mechanisms for getting access 
to data for research and innovation purposes. It does not replace traditional data sharing 
mechanisms or existing data sharing agreements. Users can continue using them. If they 
do so, their rules apply. They may differ from those in the EHDS (see also D6.2 Guideline 
for Health Data Users on good application practice for data access and data requests).   
It is not permitted to combine or jointly analyse electronic health data obtained through 
the EHDS framework with data accessed via other mechanisms (e.g. national procedures, 
institutional agreements). Combining or jointly analysing electronic health data obtained 
through the EHDS framework with data from other sources (e.g. data already held by the 
user, or accessed via national procedures) may be permitted, but must be explicitly 
authorised in the data permit. In accordance with Article 68(1)(b) of the EHDS regulation, 
any planned data linkage or combination must be declared in the application and 
assessed by the HDAB. Only if included in the permit can such linkage be carried out 
within the SPE. 
 
  
5 What is an SPE and why and when do data users need an SPE?  
An SPE is a secure digital workspace where authorised users can process electronic 
health data in a highly controlled manner. In the context of the EHDS, SPEs are a core 
component of the infrastructure enabling secondary use of personal electronic health 
data. 
The legal basis for SPEs is established in Article 2(1)(c) and Article 73 of the EHDS 
regulation (Regulation (EU) 2025/327). These provisions specify that SPEs must 
guarantee a high level of security and confidentiality when processing sensitive health 
data for permitted purposes under the regulation. The concept draws from the definition 
in Article 2(20) of the Data Governance Act (DGA) but is further specified in the EHDS 
regulation to reflect the particular requirements of the health sector. 
An SPE must meet at least the following core criteria: 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   11 
   
• 
Data security: Prevent unauthorised access, maintain confidentiality, and ensure 
data integrity; 
• 
Restricted access: Allow users to process only those data covered by a valid data 
permit, and only within the permitted scope; 
• 
Controlled outputs: Ensure that only non-personal data—that is, aggregated and 
anonymised results—can be exported, and only after authorisation by the 
competent HDAB. 
Under the EHDS regulation, SPEs may be used in two complementary contexts: 
1. By data users, under a data permit (Articles 68–74), to process personal electronic 
health data in a secure and compliant way. 
2. By HDABs themselves, when preparing data such as in data linkage scenarios or to 
prepare anonymous statistical outputs in response to a data request (Article 69), for 
example. In such cases, the HDAB acts as the data controller and may rely on the same 
secure infrastructure to conduct the analysis internally before delivering the anonymised 
result to the requester1. 
Thus, while data permits allow approved users to access data within the SPE, data 
requests do not involve user access to personal data—but still rely on the technical 
capabilities of an SPE to ensure lawful and se-cure processing by the HDAB. 
In both cases, the key safeguard is that personal data cannot be downloaded or exported 
from the SPE. Only anonymised, aggregate outputs may leave the environment, and only 
after validation. Once the analysis is completed, data must be deleted or archived in 
accordance with the terms of the data permit. 
Further technical specifications will be adopted to detail SPE requirements, including the 
types of data that may be processed and exported, and the conditions for approval by 
HDABs. 
The concept of an SPE under the EHDS regulation (Article 2(1)(c) and Article 73) builds 
upon the general definition in Article 2(20) of the DGA. In the EHDS context, an SPE is a 
technical and organisational framework ensuring that processing of electronic health data 
for secondary use purposes meets the highest standards of data security, confidentiality, 
and compliance with Union law—especially the GDPR and the EHDS regulation. 
According to Article 73(2) EHDS, only anonymised results may be exported from the SPE 
by the user, subject to verification by the HDAB. But the data within the SPE can be 
pseudonymised (i.e., personal data), and not all data requests lead to SPE use—
anonymised data may also be provided outside SPEs under Article 69 responding to a 
 
1 SPEs may also be used directly by HDABs themselves, for instance when producing anonymised 
statistical outputs in response to a data request under Article 69(4) of the EHDS regulation. In such 
cases, the HDAB remains the data controller and processes the data internally, using the SPE to 
ensure full security and compliance with the regulation. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   12 
   
health data request. The HDAB may need the SPE as a workspace to do the analyses 
needed to reply to such a data request. 
5.1 Excursus - What is personal data? 
The EHDS regulation uses the definition in Art. 4 (1) GDPR defining personal data as any 
information relating to an identified or – directly or indirectly - identifiable natural person. 
Identification can occur through information such as name, social security number, 
location data, email address, or factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, 
mental, economic, cultural, or social identity of that person. In many cases, the identity of 
a person can be determined by combining several pieces of information. Therefore, the 
process of anonymisation often consists of deleting or modifying identifying information in 
a data set so that the person is no longer identifiable through any means reasonably likely 
to be used. What those means are must be assessed considering all objective factors, 
such as the cost and time required for identification, the available technology and the 
likelihood of someone attempting re-identification.  
It is important to understand that absolute and permanent anonymity is neither possible 
nor required by the GDPR. Anonymity is not a static concept, but depends on context, 
including the availability of other data sources and the knowledge of the person accessing 
the data. For example, „Harry Smith“ may not be enough to identify an individual in a 
global telephone directory (no „singling out“), but it probably is in a classroom. The crucial 
factor is the re-identification risk in a given context. Therefore, organisational measures 
such as access controls and purpose limitations also play a role in ensuring anonymity. 
For the distinction between personal and non-personal data please also refer to D7.2.   
In accordance with this context-dependent approach, there are various technical 
concepts, methods and standards for anonymisation. Their application depends on the 
environment in which the data is used. The more openly accessible data is, the more 
robust the anonymisation must be, because more contextual information may be 
available, it is always possible to imagine a third party who—now or in the future—has 
additional data that could be used for re-identification. To prevent this, robust 
anonymisation often requires techniques such as aggregation, generalisation, 
suppression, and noise injection. These may reduce data utility for some purposes. It is 
always possible to imagine a third party who—now or in the future—has additional data 
that could be used for re-identification. To prevent this, robust anonymisation often 
requires techniques such as aggregation, generalisation, suppression, and noise 
injection. These may reduce data utility for some purposes. This is the case within the 
EHDS: when processing data in an SPE based on data access application and 
subsequent data permit, only anonymous data (Art. 73 Nr. 2 EHDS reg), i.e. in a highly 
aggregated manner will be allowed to retrieve from an SPE at the end of the processing. 
If the users are sure that anonymised data in this sense is sufficient for their research 
question, they can submit a request using the data request mechanism (Art. 69 EHDS 
reg). In this case, the HDAB processes the data and provides anonymised statistical 
outputs for download. An SPE is not required in this workflow (see guideline D6.2 on Good 
Application and Access Practice). Nevertheless, anonymity remains a moving target. The 
final decision on whether the data requested is sufficiently anonymised to be made 
available for download—or whether it must instead be analysed within an SPE—is taken 
by the HDAB. If users require individual-level data, even with identifying elements 
removed or minimised, there is a strong likelihood that the dataset will not qualify as 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   13 
   
anonymous under the EHDS regulation and will therefore have to be processed within an 
SPE and cannot be downloaded as such. 
5.2 In which format is personal data made available in an SPE?  
No directly identifiable personal data (e.g., names, addresses, social security numbers) 
will be made available to data users within an SPE. Instead, the data made available to 
users within an SPE will be in either pseudonymised or anonymised format, as defined in 
the data permit. In pseudonymised datasets, directly identifying information (e.g., names, 
addresses, social security numbers) is removed, but the data still refers to individual 
persons. This allows for analysis at the individual level, while preventing direct 
identification by the data user. In accordance with Articles 67(2)(e) and 68(1)(c) of the 
EHDS regulation, if the data are provided in pseudonymised format, this must be explicitly 
justified in the access application and approved in the data permit — in particular, where 
the intended analysis cannot be performed using anonymised data alone. 
According to Article 4(5) of the GDPR, pseudonymisation means: 
“the processing of personal data in such a manner that the personal data can no longer 
be attributed to a specific data subject without the use of additional information, provided 
that such additional information is kept separately and is subject to technical and 
organisational measures...” 
One key distinction between pseudonymisation and anonymisation lies in this “additional 
information” — often referred to as the pseudonymisation key or linkage secret. In a 
pseudonymised dataset, the individual is still theoretically re-identifiable by an authorised 
entity (e.g., the HDAB or data holder), but not by the data user operating within the SPE. 
Another aspect is the reduction of potentially identifying information. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   14 
   
Figure 1. Depiction of a pseudonymisation procedure of routine healthcare data. 
 
Although the pseudonym replaces the direct identifier, the record still refers to one 
individual. 
Within an SPE, data users work with pseudonymised data, which still represents individual 
persons, but without directly revealing their identity. Because these data are processed 
in a highly secure and controlled environment, they do not need to be heavily transformed 
(e.g., aggregated, generalised, distorted) to prevent re-identification. 
In contrast, when data are made available for download, they must be fully anonymised, 
meaning that all identifying information and any possibility of indirect identification must 
be removed. This often requires significant modification of the dataset, which can reduce 
its detail, structure, and analytical value. 
SPEs therefore allow data users to work with higher-quality, more detailed data—while 
still ensuring privacy—because the data remain protected within the secure environment 
and cannot be exported. 
Under Article 73 of the EHDS regulation, HDABs must authorise the use of a given SPE 
and ensure that: 
• 
The SPE is used exclusively for the purposes defined in the data permit; 
• 
Only anonymised results are exported after analysis; 
• 
The SPE complies with data protection and information security requirements; 
• 
Audits are conducted regularly, including by third parties where appropriate; 
• 
Corrective measures are taken in case of identified vulnerabilities or non-
compliance. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   15 
   
The regulation does not define the precise technical architecture of an SPE but empowers 
the Commission to adopt an implementing act describing those technical specifications. 
These will cover requirements for: 
• 
Technical and organisational safeguards; 
• 
Data protection and confidentiality; 
• 
Interoperability; 
• 
Tools and functionalities available to users in the SPE. 
For additional details, see technical specification for HDABs on the implementation of 
SPEs (D7.4). 
 
6 How to suggest the appropriate SPE?   
Under the EHDS regulation, HDABs are responsible for granting access to electronic 
health data for secondary use. This includes attributing the SPE where data will be made 
available for analysis. 
 
There may be multiple SPEs available within a given country or across borders. In their 
data access application, applicants can suggest an SPE they consider suitable for their 
specific needs, but the final decision lies with the HDAB. The selected SPE will be 
specified in the data permit, issued under Article 68 of the EHDS regulation. Each Member 
State must ensure the availability of at least one functional SPE through which access to 
data can be provided. This means that even if several SPEs exist, the HDAB must always 
be able to fall back on a compliant “last-resort” SPE to guarantee access. 
 
What to include in an application 
 
A data applicant, if there is no publicly available information about which SPEs may be 
used, is advised to contact the HDAB early in the process to explore which SPEs may be 
available and suitable for their study. In the application, users must specify their expected 
technical requirements, in line with Article 67(2) of the EHDS regulation. These may 
include: 
• 
Required computational power (e.g., RAM, CPU cores, GPU access); 
• 
Data volume and storage needs; 
• 
Required software tools or statistical packages; 
• 
Specific types of data to be analysed (e.g. genomics, imaging). 
 
Users may also suggest a specific SPE and provide reasons (e.g. cost considerations, 
prior experience) to support your proposal. This information will help the HDAB identify 
the most appropriate SPE for the use case. 
 
What varies between SPEs 
 
Different SPEs may offer different capabilities. A prospective user, should consider the 
following aspects: 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   16 
   
• 
Software: Some SPEs may already include commonly used tools. Others allow 
users to request the installation of specific software, but for security reasons, 
installations are handled by the SPE operator— users will not have administrative 
rights inside the SPE. Licensing models vary: some SPEs may support bring-your-
own-license (BYOL), while others require licenses to be purchased by the user or 
the operator. 
 
• 
Data types and scalability: Users’ needs in terms of amount and type of data may 
vary significantly. Not all SPEs are optimised to handle all data types (e.g. high-
resolution medical images, longitudinal EHR data, or genomic sequences). If the 
users’ project requires high scalability, they should confirm in advance whether 
the SPE infrastructure can support the dataset and processing needs. 
 
• 
Computing power: While many SPEs provide standard computing environments, 
some projects may require advanced capabilities (e.g. parallel computing, GPU, 
or even HPC/quantum computing). These capacities are not guaranteed in all 
SPEs. 
 
• 
Cost considerations: Pricing models may vary. Some HDABs or SPE operators 
may cover infrastructure costs; others may charge users for processing time, 
storage, or software licensing. Always verify the cost implications early, especially 
if budget constraints apply. See also chapter 7. 
 
• 
Access modalities: Access to the SPE may be offered via web interface, virtual 
desktop, or (less commonly) physical access points (e.g., terminals in academic 
institutions). Some access models may be restricted by institutional firewalls or 
national regulations. 
 
• 
Changing the SPE: If users need to change the SPE after a data permit has been 
granted—whether due to infrastructure limitations, access issues, or project 
redesign—they must request an amendment to the data permit. This includes any 
change to the SPE itself, modifications to user access, data availability, or the 
study team (Article 68(13), EHDS regulation). They should contact their HDAB to 
initiate this process. 
 
 
7 What are the fees to use the SPE?  
Under Article 62 of the EHDS regulation, HDABs may charge fees for services related 
to the secondary use of electronic health data. These fees are intended to cover (part of) 
the costs of services – such as SPE provision – provided by the HDAB, any potential 
external SPE provider, and data holders. Fees must be transparent, proportionate and 
non-discriminatory, while potential reductions may be available for specific user groups, 
as laid out in Article 62.1 and outlined in D4.1 Guideline for HDABs on fees and penalties 
for non-compliance related to the EHDS regulation.  
These may include fees for use of the SPE, data preparation, or permit evaluation. The 
purpose of these fees is to cover part of the operational costs incurred by HDABs, external 
SPE providers, and data holders. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   17 
   
HDABs may charge fees for the following services (outlined in Article 62.1 and detailed in 
D4.1 Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on fees and penalties for non-compliance 
related to the EHDS regulation):  
• 
Evaluating the data access application: Including reviewing and assessing the 
data permit application or data request; 
• 
Preparing the dataset: Covering costs for processes such as pseudonymisation, 
anonymisation, data linkage and consolidating datasets from multiple data 
holders; 
• 
Using the SPE: Including SPE provision, user training, statistical software licenses 
(if required), processing capacities, data storage/archiving, and ongoing support 
for data use, including for preapproving scripts for upload to the SPE and checking 
the anonymity of any output before download from the SPE.  
 
The expected fees must be communicated by the HDAB to the data user before the permit 
is issued, allowing the data user to decide whether to withdraw or proceed with the 
application (please also refer to D6.2 Guideline for Health Data Users on good application 
practice for data access and data requests, section 8.5). All applicable fees, 
corresponding to the services provided, must be paid at the time the specific service is 
delivered, as detailed in the data permit.  If a data user requests changes after the permit 
has been issued (e.g., extending the permit duration or modifying the dataset), additional 
fees may apply to cover the costs of these adjustments.  
 
For detailed information on fee structures and conditions, refer to D4.1 (Guideline for 
Health Data Access Bodies on fees and penalties for non-compliance related to the EHDS 
regulation).   
 
 
8 Communication with SPE provider  
Once access to the data has been granted by the HDAB, the HDAB activates the user’s 
access to the SPE specified in the data permit. 
 
If the SPE is managed directly by the HDAB, all communication—whether technical, 
operational, or related to support—goes through the HDAB. 
 
If the SPE is operated by a third-party provider, a distinction applies: Communication 
related to data governance and supervision continues to go through the HDAB. 
Communication regarding technical specifications, access modalities, and services may 
be handled directly between the user and the SPE provider, however any communication 
outside of the scope of the data permit has to be done via the HDAB. An example would 
be extending the SPE usage. 
 
However, under Article 62(6) of the EHDS regulation, the single invoice principle applies: 
The HDAB is responsible for issuing a single invoice covering all applicable fees, including 
those charged by third-party providers (such as external SPE operators or data holders). 
This means that even when communication with a third-party SPE provider takes place, 
all payments must be made through the HDAB. Users should not receive or process 
separate invoices from different entities. This principle ensures transparency, simplifies 
the administrative process for users, and guarantees that all service-related costs are 
coordinated through the HDAB. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   18 
   
 
9 How to get access to the SPE  
Access to the SPE is a strictly regulated process that ensures and guarantees the 
protection of health data as a special category of data. Access is managed and controlled 
at several levels as follows: Access is granted only to individuals who are explicitly named 
in the data permit and have completed the enrolment and identification process. 
 
The access process generally involves the following steps: 
 
Enrolment and Identification: First, the individuals who should have access to the data 
and are therefore named in the data permit must enrol before getting access. The 
enrolment phase consists of thorough identification measures. Cybersecurity measures 
will integrate robust security strategies like Zero Trust Policy: Trust no one, identify 
everything. 
 
Login Credentials and Password Policy: Users receive individual login credentials 
(login ID and password). Passwords must meet strong security requirements—typically 
based on recognised standards such as the NIST guidelines (e.g., length, complexity, 
regular renewal). 
 
Multifactor Authentication (MFA): Strict multifactor authentication (MFA) is required. 
This may involve: 
• 
Something you know (e.g., password); 
• 
Something you have (e.g., token, smart card); 
• 
Something you are (e.g., fingerprint, facial recognition). 
 
Most systems will rely on device-based authentication (e.g., hardware tokens or 
certificates), which can be replaced in case of compromise—unlike biometric credentials.  
 
Continuous Monitoring and Reporting: All access to the SPE is logged and monitored. 
Usage is subject to continuous auditing to detect anomalies or unauthorised behaviour. 
Any change to the list of authorised users (e.g., adding a team member or re-placing one) 
must be formally requested and approved by the HDAB as an amendment to the data 
permit (Article 68(13) EHDS regulation). 
 
Access will be denied to any person: 
• 
Not named in the permit, 
• 
Whose identity cannot be verified, 
• 
Or whose credentials have expired or been revoked. 
 
 
10 How to analyse data within the SPE  
SPEs are designed to allow the analysis of personal electronic health data in compliance 
with the EHDS regulation and the GDPR. All EHDS-compliant SPEs implement strict 
security and accountability standards to protect sensitive data and to ensure lawful 
processing by authorised users. Users must not attempt to circumvent or disable any SPE 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   19 
   
security features. All activities in the SPE are logged, monitored, and subject to audit by 
the HDAB. User training is provided to help researchers use the SPE correctly, avoid 
mistakes, and understand the available features and compliance requirements. 
 
1. Tools and environment for data analysis 
SPEs offer a set of pre-approved analytical tools. The availability and type of tools (e.g. 
R, Python, STATA) may vary between SPEs. If other software is required, users may 
request its inclusion. Installation is subject to the SPE provider’s approval and HDAB 
oversight, and users do not have administrative access. Due to security concerns, 
commonly used collaboration platforms (e.g. Slack, Microsoft Teams) may not be allowed 
within the SPE. 
 
2. Conducting analysis 
Users may only conduct the analyses authorised in their data permit. Intermediate results 
must be stored within the SPE; these outputs are not visible externally but may be logged 
for oversight purposes. Federated analysis (i.e., analysing data stored in multiple SPEs 
without centralising it) is possible, subject to HDAB oversight. Technical implementation 
details are covered in Task 7.4. 
 
3. Preparing and exporting results 
• 
Only anonymised, aggregate results may be exported from the SPE; 
• 
All outputs must be reviewed to ensure they do not permit re-identification; 
• 
The HDAB must validate the results before authorising export (Article 74 EHDS 
regulation); 
• 
Export occurs via the SPE’s secure export mechanism. 
 
4. Accountability and user roles 
Under Article 74(1) of the EHDS regulation, the data user is the data controller for the 
analysis conducted in the SPE (see chapter 11). As such, users are responsible for: 
• 
Complying with all legal, ethical, and security requirements; 
• 
Observing the restrictions specified in the data permit (e.g. authorised users, 
approved purposes); 
• 
Ensuring that access to data is strictly limited to what is necessary. 
 
User behaviour in the SPE must reflect this responsibility. In particular: Use of mobile 
phones, screen recording, or video calls is prohibited in or around the SPE. Users must 
not take notes that could identify individuals. All user activity is logged chronologically to 
support auditing and investigate security events. 
 
5. Team collaboration in the SPE 
When multiple researchers work together in the same SPE: 
• 
A clear organisational structure must be in place; 
• 
Roles and responsibilities should be defined and documented; 
• 
Access levels may differ between team members depending on their tasks; 
• 
Real-time collaboration features may be limited, and communication about the 
data must not take place outside the SPE environment. 
 
 6. Breaches and consequences (see also chapter 12) 
Any violation of the data permit or SPE rules—such as unauthorised access, re-
identification attempts, or processing for unauthorised purposes—may result in: 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   20 
   
• 
Revocation of access; 
• 
Administrative sanctions under the EHDS Regulation; 
• 
Penalties under the GDPR. 
 
The security and logging features of the SPE are designed to prevent, detect, and 
document such breaches. Please also refer to chapter 10 for possible training activities. 
 
11 Who is accountable as data controller?  
Under the EHDS regulation, the term "data controller" follows the definition set out in 
Article 4(7) of the GDPR. A controller is the natural or legal person, public authority, 
agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and 
means of the processing of personal data. 
 
In the context of the EHDS, however, the role of the data controller is more narrowly 
defined than in general GDPR practice. The regulation itself determines many of the 
purposes and essential means of processing. As a result, the discretion of the data user 
acting as controller is significantly limited. 
 
According to Article 74(1) of the EHDS regulation, the data user becomes the data 
controller for the processing activities carried out within the SPE, and only within the scope 
of the data permit issued by the HDAB. This means that the user-controller is responsible 
for how the permitted analysis is performed but cannot decide on the broader legal basis 
for data access or the technical environment. Those aspects are governed by the 
regulation, the data permit, and the technical setup of the SPE. 
 
The controller is responsible for ensuring that all processing complies with the GDPR and 
the EHDS regulation. This includes observing purpose limitation, data minimisation, and 
safeguarding data subject rights. The controller must also respect the restrictions and 
conditions set out in the data permit. 
 
A data processor is an entity that processes personal data on behalf of the controller. 
Under Article 28(3) GDPR, the relationship between controller and processor must be 
governed by a binding contract or other legal act under Union or Member State law. This 
agreement must set out the subject matter, duration, nature and purpose of the 
processing, and limit the processor to acting only on documented instructions from the 
controller. 
 
In the EHDS context, technical operators of the SPE or providers of support services may 
act as processors. However, they too are bound by the regulation and the structure of the 
data permit, which means the controller cannot instruct them freely beyond those legal 
constraints. 
 
In cases where two or more parties jointly determine the purposes and means of 
processing, they may qualify as joint controllers. This requires a joint controllership 
agreement in line with Article 26 GDPR, clearly allocating their respective responsibilities. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   21 
   
Articles 74 and 75 of the EHDS regulation establish specific responsibilities. Under Article 
74(1), the data user is the controller when analysing data in an SPE. Under Article 74, the 
HDAB is the processor on behalf when it processes data in response to a data request. 
 
These provisions clarify accountability depending on whether the data is processed by a 
user in an SPE or by the HDAB in response to a request. 
 
Table 1: Summary of controllership for a simple exemplary scenario (data 
holder/HDAB/data user without intervention of a trusted data holder and data 
intermediation entity) 
Processing activity 
Data controller 
Data preparation (data targeting, quality control, 
additional pseudonymisation, etc.) 
Data holder & HDAB2 
Data matching / linkage 
HDAB 
Transfer of data to the SPE   
Data holder  
Ingestion and additional pseudonymisation 
HDAB 
Validation of data on the SPE (assessing if the 
data requested are correct, complete and fit for 
purposes in relation to content of the data access 
permit)  
Data user 
Pseudonymisation between workspaces, if 
foreseen by national regulation 
HDAB 
Import of data in the project's dedicated analysis 
workspace on the SPE 
HDAB 
Data analysis 
Data user 
Export of anonymised data from the technological 
platform from the SPE to the data user, after 
verification of the degree of aggregation and 
anonymisation by HDAB 
Data user 
Cold storage within the time of the permit 
Data user 
Security measures on the SPE with regards to 
data processing including back-up, maintenance 
and traceability 
HDAB 
Deletion 
HDAB 
  
 
2 Under Articles 68 and 75 of the EHDS regulation, the HDAB can indeed ensure or coordinate certain 
data preparation tasks (including pseudonymisation), either as part of the data permit process or when 
acting as data controller in the context of a data request. Therefore, while preparation at source is 
important and should be the preferred option, this role is not necessarily limited to the data holder. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   22 
   
Where two or more national contact points or authorised participants put electronic health 
data in the secure processing environment managed by the Commission, they shall be 
joint controllers, and the Commission shall be processor for the purpose of processing 
data in that environment (Art. 75 (9) and (10) of the EHDS regulation). 
 
Where the EHDS regulation does not provide for specific rules regarding controllership, 
the general rules from the GDPR apply.  
 
If the applicant/data user consists of more than one individual or entities (e.g., a research 
consortium), all members of the group could be joint controllers. 
 
 
12 What happens in case of rule violation? 
While using SPEs, the data user’s activities are monitored and logged. Data users must 
strictly adhere to the obligations set out in the EHDS regulation, the GDPR, and the 
specific conditions laid down in their data permit. These safeguards ensure that the 
secondary use of health data does not harm individuals, public trust, or societal interests. 
Prohibited actions include (Articles 54 and 61 of the EHDS regulation): 
• 
Using data to take decisions that have detrimental effects on individuals (e.g. related 
to insurance, employment or banking); 
• 
Engaging in advertising or marketing activities; 
• 
Developing harmful products or services; 
• 
Conducting activities in conflict with ethical provisions laid down in national law; 
• 
Attempting to re-identify individuals or or to draw identifiable group-level information 
from pseudonymised data; 
• 
Providing access to data or the SPE to third parties not listed in the data permit. 
Data users must immediately report any breaches or security incidents directly to the 
HDAB. Failure to do so may result in additional penalties. 
• 
Non-compliance may result in enforcement measures under the EHDS regulation, 
including fines based on the severity and nature of the violation; 
• 
Suspensions: Revocation of the data permit or exclusion from the EHDS for 
secondary use; 
• 
Damage compensation: Liability for damages caused to natural persons or SPE 
providers; 
• 
Legal actions: Depending on the severity of the breach, further legal or criminal 
actions may be pursued in accordance with national law. 
If a finding of non-compliance indicates a possible breach of the GDPR, the HDAB is 
required to immediately inform the supervisory authorities and provide them with all 
relevant information regarding this finding. 
 
Detailed information about enforcement measures is outlined in D4.1 Guideline for Health 
Data Access Bodies on fees and penalties for non-compliance related to the EHDS 
regulation. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   23 
   
The HDAB will give the health data user an opportunity to state their views on suspected 
breaches within a reasonable period that does not exceed four weeks (Article 63 of the 
EHDS regulation and D4.1 Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on fees and penalties 
for non-compliance related to the EHDS regulation). 
 
13 What happens after finishing data analysis? 
Once data analysis is completed, only anonymised and non-personal results may be 
exported from the SPE. These must be in statistical format and comply with the conditions 
set out in the data permit. Before authorising the export, the HDAB will verify that the 
outputs do not present a risk of re-identification, as required under Article 74(2) of the 
EHDS regulation. 
In some cases, the data user may no longer require full computing capacity but may still 
need access to the SPE for limited purposes, such as verifying reproducibility or 
responding to peer review requests. In such situations, the SPE may offer a reduced-
capacity archiving function, which allows continued access to the analysis environment 
while lowering infrastructure usage and potentially reducing associated costs. This 
archiving function is intended for temporary use within the period of the data permit. It 
does not extend the duration of the permit or the retention period for the dataset. 
According to Article 68(12) of the EHDS regulation, data permits are granted for the 
duration necessary to achieve the declared purpose, for a maximum of 10 years. This 
duration may be extended once, for an additional period of up to 10 years, if the user 
submits a justified request at least one month before the permit expires. 
Once the data permit expires, the electronic health data stored in the SPE must be deleted 
within six months. However, at the user’s request, the formulas or processing scripts used 
to generate the dataset may be retained by the HDAB for transparency or reproducibility 
purposes. 
In line with Article 72 and accompanying guidelines, HDABs must ensure transparency 
by publishing information on data access applications, data requests, and permits 
granted. This is further detailed in D8.3 (Guideline for Health Data Access Bodies on 
informing natural persons about the use of health data – “Citizen Information Point”). 
Data users must also publish the results of their work using electronic health data, and 
inform the HDAB of any findings of significant relevance to public or individual health, as 
outlined in D8.4 (Guideline for data users on handling research outcomes). 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   24 
   
 
Annex 1: EHDS user journey description 
User journey 
When a data user3 applies for electronic health data for secondary use purposes, such as 
research and innovation activities, education, and policy-making, within the European 
Health Data Space (EHDS), the user journey consists of several stages (see Figure 1). 
Access for certain purposes (public or occupational health, policy-making and regulatory 
activities, and statistics) is reserved for public sector bodies and Union institutions (see 
Chapter IV, Art. 53(1) and 53(2)). 
 
Figure 1: EHDS user journey consists of five main phases: data discovery, data access, 
data preparation, use of data and finalisation. 
 
 
Data discovery 
Before being able to use the data, the user needs to investigate whether the data needed 
is available, and whether it is available in the necessary format for the secondary use 
purpose. This phase is called data discovery. Datasets available in the EU can be found 
in a metadata catalogue at https://qa.data.health.europa.eu/. Once the data discovery is 
completed, the user can begin the process of applying for the data. 
 
Data access 
In the data access phase, the user fills in and submits a dedicated and standardised data 
access application form or a data request to a health data access body (HDAB)4. The 
user must complete the information required in the form, upload necessary documents, 
and provide justifications as needed. 
Data access application form is used when the user seeks to use personal level data. 
Data request is for cases when the user wants to apply for anonymised statistical data. 
 
Data preparation 
During this phase, the data holder(s)5 deliver(s) the necessary data to the HDAB, which 
starts to prepare the data for secondary use. Techniques for pseudonymisation, 
anonymisation, generalisation, suppression, and randomisation of personal data are 
 
3 Data user = a person using electronic health data for a secondary use purpose  
4  Health data access body (HDAB) = the authority responsible for assessing the information provided 
by the data user who applies for electronic health data for a secondary use purpose 
5 Data holder = Any natural or legal person, public authority or other body in the healthcare or the care 
sectors that has the right or obligation to provide electronic health data for secondary use purposes or 
the ability to make such data available (see more EHDS Regulation Art. 2 (1t)) 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   25 
   
employed. The data minimisation principle (as per the GDPR) must be respected to 
ensure privacy. 
 
Use of data 
In this phase, the user performs analyses based on the received data for the purpose 
defined in the application phase. Analysing personal level data must be performed in a 
secure processing environment6. The duration of this phase is specified in the regulation 
(Art 68(12)). 
 
Finalisation 
This last phase of the user journey concerns data user’s duties regarding analysis 
outcomes derived from secondary use of data. Data user must publish the results of 
secondary use of health data within 18 months of the completion of the data processing 
in a secure processing environment or of receiving the requested health data. The results 
should be provided in an anonymous format. The data user must inform the health data 
access body of the results. In addition, the data user must mention in the output that the 
results have been obtained by using data in the framework of the EHDS. 
 
6 Secure processing environment = an environment with strong technical and security safeguards in 
which the data user can process personal level electronic health data 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   26 
   
 
Annex 2: Glossary 
Table 2: Preliminary glossary according to wave 1 in TEHDAS2. It will be aligned across 
all TEHDAS2 deliverables in a next step. Please note, that the current version of the 
glossary is not exhaustive. Please refer to the master glossary for TEHDAS2 for more 
information. 
 
Term  
Description  
Anonymisation  
The process by which personal data is irreversibly altered in 
such a way that a data subject can no longer be identified 
directly or indirectly, either by the data controller alone or in 
collaboration with any other party. Anonymised data falls 
outside the scope of data protection laws such as GDPR. 
(GDPR Recital 26)  
Data access  
Processing by a data user of data that has been provided by a 
data holder, in accordance with specific technical, legal, or 
organisational requirements, without necessarily implying the 
transmission or downloading of such data. (DGA, Article 
2(8),(9)&(13))  
Data controller 
A data controller is a person or organisation that determines the 
purposes and essential means of the processing of personal 
data. The role of the data controller can be shared by several 
people or organisations. In that case, they are defined as joint 
controllers. The controller is accountable and responsible for 
establishing a lawful data processing workflow and observing 
the rights of data subjects. (GDPR, Article 4(1)(7)) 
Data minimisation  
A principle mandating organisations to only collect, store and 
process the minimum necessary amount of personal data for a 
specific purpose. This principle is fundamental under GDPR 
and relevant to the tasks outlined in EHDS. (GDPR Article 
5(1)(c))  
Data permit  
An administrative decision issued to a health data user by a 
health data access body to process certain electronic health 
data specified in the data permit for specific secondary use 
purposes, based on conditions laid down in Chapter IV of this 
Regulation; (EHDS, Article 2(2)(v))  
Data processor 
The data processor should handle data exclusively in the 
manner prescribed by the controller. A data processor acts 
under the detailed instructions of the data controller only, by 
processing personal data on his behalf. (GDPR, Article 4(1)(8)) 
Dataset  
Means a structured collection of electronic health data. (EHDS, 
Article 2(2)(w))   


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   27 
   
Term  
Description  
Health data access 
body (HDAB)  
Member state-designated authority that facilitates the 
secondary use of electronic health data. HDABs assess the 
information provided by the health data applicant and decide on 
health data requests and access applications, authorise and 
issue data permits, obtain data from data holders and make 
data available in Secure Processing Environments. HDABs 
systematically track the data request and data access 
applications received and the data permits issued. As per 
Article 58 of the EHDS, HDABs are required to publicly list 
information on the data permits issued.  
Reference to the EHDS regulation:  
 
Recital 52: […] providing access to health data through the 
involvement of health data access bodies, […]   
In addition, the health data access body should assess the 
information provided by the health data applicant, based on 
which it should be able to issue a data permit for the processing 
of personal electronic health data pursuant to this Regulation 
that should fulfil the requirements and conditions set out in 
Chapter IV of this Regulation. […]   
Health data holder  
Any person, organisation or public body involved in healthcare, 
care services, health-related products, wellness apps or 
health(care) research, that has the right to process data for 
health care provision or for public health purposes, 
reimbursement, research, policy making, official statistics or 
patient safety. This includes, for example, hospitals, insurers, 
research institutes and EU institutions 
Reference to the EHDS regulation:  
Article 2(2)(t)): ‘health data holder’ means any natural or legal 
person, public authority, agency or other body in the healthcare 
or the care sectors, including reimbursement services where 
necessary, as well as any natural or legal person developing 
products or services intended for the health, healthcare or care 
sectors, developing or manufacturing wellness applications, 
performing research in relation to the healthcare or care sectors 
or acting as a mortality registry, as well as any Union institution, 
body, office or agency, that has either:   
i. 
the right or obligation, in accordance with applicable 
Union or national law and in its capacity as a controller 
or joint controller, to process personal electronic health 
data for the provision of healthcare or care or for the 
purposes of public health, reimbursement, research, 
innovation, policy making, official statistics or patient 
safety or for regulatory purposes; or   


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   28 
   
Term  
Description  
ii. 
the ability to make available non-personal electronic 
health data through the control of the technical design of 
a product and related services, including by registering, 
providing, restricting access to or exchanging such 
data;  
Health data user  
A natural or legal person, including Union institutions, bodies, 
offices or agencies, which has been granted lawful access to 
electronic health data for secondary use pursuant to a data 
permit, a health data request approval or an access approval by 
an authorised participant in HealthData@EU; (EHDS, Article 
2(2)(u))  
Pseudonymisation  
The processing of personal data in such a way that the data 
can no longer be attributed to a specific data subject without the 
use of additional information, provided that such additional 
information is kept separately and is subject to technical and 
organizational measures to ensure non-attribution to an 
identified or identifiable person. (GDPR Article 4(5))  
Secure Processing 
Environment (SPE)  
‘Secure Processing Environment’ means the physical or virtual 
environment and organisational means to ensure compliance 
with Union law, such as Regulation (EU) 2016/679, in particular 
with regard to data subjects’ rights, intellectual property rights, 
and commercial and statistical confidentiality, integrity and 
accessibility, as well as with applicable national law, and to 
allow the entity providing the secure processing environment to 
determine and supervise all data processing actions, including 
the display, storage, download and export of data and the 
calculation of derivative data through computational algorithms. 
(DGA, Article 2(20); EHDS, Article 2 (1)(c))  
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   29 
   
 
Annex 3: How this Guideline has been developed 
 
This guideline is the outcome of task 71. of the joint action TEHDAS2. A team of 
multinational and multidisciplinary experts has developed the first draft of the guideline 
from May 2024 until January 2025 in constant dialogue with the EU Commission and other 
stakeholders like ministry representatives. Every expert worked on one of the chapters 
they had specific expertise about. The chapters were then discussed in weekly meetings 
with the whole team. 
 
 
Summary of the public consultation results and main feedback 
A draft version of this document was in public consultation between the 20th of January 
and 28th of February 2025. This document was commented in total for 78 times. The 
number of responses may contain some duplicates as there was no individual 
identification and verification required to respond to the surveys. Some respondents have 
also responded both from data holder’s and data user’s perspective. The responses came 
from 18 different countries from the EU countries and the European Economic Area 
countries. Responses from Eastern European countries and international organisations 
were largely missing. The respondents were primarily from three main types of 
organisations, listed in order of prevalence: Data management/processing (15), 
information technology (13) and research and development (12).    
 
Classification of comments from the public consultation 
 
1. Style and Language 
 
The style received mixed feedback—some considered it appropriate, others found it 
overly complex or insufficiently justified from a legal perspective. As it was challenging to 
meet all expectations, the following principles were adopted: 
 
• 
Clarity for a broad audience was prioritised. The viewpoint of a student preparing a 
research project was used as a baseline. Laypersons unlikely to seek access to health 
data were not targeted, though professionals outside of research were still considered. 
• 
The text was kept as concise as possible. While this requires careful reading, it avoids 
the inclusion of unnecessary information. 
• 
Quotations from legal texts were minimised to improve readability for non-specialists. 
Nevertheless, alignment with the EHDS regulation was ensured. All statements are 
based on applicable legal provisions, which were thoroughly discussed with the 
European Commission and several ministries. The underlying legal reasoning was 
deliberately excluded, as it was considered of little practical use to end users. In our 
view, theoretical legal debates are not appropriate in a user guideline. 
 
 
2. General comments on EHDS and requests for more information 
 
As the guideline entered the process of public consultation very early on, namely before 
the EHDS regulation had been finally adopted and before other guidelines dealing with 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   30 
   
the basic technical components of secondary use had been finalised, many 
commentators rightly missed essential information. Quite a few of the comments are 
therefore based on requests for additional information and explanations. Below is a 
summary of points that were raised: 
 
• 
Legal and regulatory clarity 
o It is unclear how GDPR obligations (e.g., patient rights relating to 
pseudonymised data) will be fulfilled; 
o Cross-border legal and ethical differences are insufficiently addressed; 
o The responsibilities of data holders in relation to compensation and legal 
recourse against HDAB decisions require further clarification. 
• 
SPE definition and governance 
o The nature of SPEs—whether physical or virtual, centralised or 
decentralised—is not defined; 
o It is unclear who is authorised to provide SPEs (HDABs, third parties, or the 
users’ own infrastructure); 
o The rationale for requiring multiple SPEs based on data sensitivity, processing 
complexity, or geographical factors is not explained. 
• 
Technical and operational details 
o Information is lacking regarding user journeys, necessary tools, and data 
access mechanisms within SPEs; 
o Requirements for computational resources or scalability for intensive tasks 
such as genomics are not specified; 
o The challenges of managing large, frequently updated datasets within SPEs 
have not been addressed; 
o There is no discussion of the potential use of federated learning or confidential 
computing. 
• 
Cross-border and interoperability concerns 
o It is unclear how data originating from different countries or SPEs will be 
handled; 
o There is no clear framework for collaboration between SPEs or for ensuring 
interoperability across HDABs and EU member states. 
• 
Enhancements and recommendations 
o The inclusion of open-source analytics tools should be considered to enhance 
SPE functionality; 
o The potential for SPEs to be dedicated to specific entities or collaborative 
initiatives is not explored. 
 
It was not possible to fulfil all these requests because deliverables, especially D7.4 were still 
not available. However, the writing team has endeavoured to maintain contact with other 
teams working in parallel on related deliverables to close as many gaps as possible. The 
present deliverable, however, remains a first high-level guidance document which must be 
updated over time as details become clearer. 
 
In the end, a common terminology is being developed for all deliverables that will address 
major open questions.  
As this guideline was one of the first in the public consultation, quite a few people took the 
opportunity to critically reflect on the EHDS and below is a summary of points that were raised:  
• 
Data access and export restrictions 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   31 
   
o Data access should be free of charge overall; 
o The requirement to export authorised anonymised results only in a “statistical 
format” is overly restrictive and goes beyond EHDS/GDPR provisions. The 
phrase “statistical format” should be removed to allow more flexibility; 
o Export limitations risk undermining data quality improvements made during 
research and may lead to unethical data deletion. 
• 
Burden on HDABs and funding 
o HDABs are assigned significant responsibilities, which must be matched by 
appropriate funding and resources; 
o The lack of local legislation in countries like Poland may hinder implementation 
and create disparities across the EU. 
• 
Access process and usability Issues 
o The access process is seen as overly burdensome, involving script reviews, 
reapplications, and linear approvals, which increases costs and delays; 
o These hurdles could make the system less usable than alternatives, such as 
clinical trial frameworks. 
• 
Overregulation and imbalance 
o The proposed system is seen as over-regulating data privacy, neglecting the 
broader balance of scientific value, societal benefit, and ethical data use; 
o TEHDAS2’s approach restricts scientific methods by mandating only pre-
approved tools and limited data export, which conflicts with how modern 
research, especially in AI, is conducted. 
• 
Technical and resource concerns 
o Implementation will demand major technical and human resources (e.g., 
programmers, data engineers), making it expensive and difficult to realise in 
the short term; 
o Integration with other infrastructures is seen as unrealistic without substantial 
investment. 
• 
Risks to innovation and competitiveness 
o EHDS regulations may impose operational constraints, especially on private 
sector data holders, potentially reducing their competitiveness; 
o Compliance costs and data-sharing obligations may disproportionately burden 
smaller organisations. 
• 
Concerns from the AI research community 
o The current SPE definition does not support the needs of AI research, 
particularly in model training and deployment; 
o AI researchers may be forced to work outside EHDS, which undermines the 
initiative’s relevance to one of the fastest-growing scientific fields. 
 
On the other hand, hopes and expectations are high. People noted that implementing 
these recommendations could significantly benefit researchers by improving access to 
valuable health data often withheld due to GDPR concerns. A secure, standardised 
system would encourage healthcare institutions to share data more confidently, fostering 
better 
collaboration 
and 
more 
comprehensive 
studies. 
However, 
successful 
implementation would require a clearer technical description of the SPE and a step-by-
step guide on its use.  
 
Disclaimer: The information in this chapter expresses the opinions of the commentators. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
D7.1 Guideline on how to use data in a secure processing environment   32 
   
3. Processable input:  
 
Finally, several very helpful comments were received, which were implemented as far as 
possible. In many cases, however, the interpretation of provisions of the EHDS Regulation 
has not yet been clarified in detail. It will be the task of the Member States to fill in the 
remaining gaps when implementing the regulation. The Member States will work together 
with the EU Commission and the EHDS Board to do this. This guideline therefore cannot 
answer all questions or take account of all the comments made. 
 
Method of processing the comments 
 
Every first author reviewed comments per chapter and amended the guideline text 
accordingly. Three main chapters were identified, that needed major revision, amendment 
and rewriting:  
• 
A Chapter on “Anonymisation/Pseudonymisation” was re-added in alignment with 
T7.2; 
• 
“How to suggest an SPE” was expanded and clarified after intensive discussion with 
the Finnish Ministry of Health and EU Commission; 
• 
Security measures regarding access to the SPE and analysis of the data in the SPE 
was expanded and more details provided in alignment with T7.4. 
 
The team rediscussed audience and style in the group and with relevant legal experts. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

